>> I had this reoccurring dream
since I was four years old.
There was this boogie man,
and everyone in my family
had to run outside and hide
from this boogie man who
was going to get us.
And so we were outside
hiding in the garden,
and he was just right
around the hedge.
I knew he was there.
And he communicated to
me, and the communication
was what needs to be killed
for the rest of you to live.
I was a very intuitive child,
deeply connected to what
I might call an inner knowing.
I could sense the things that
people didn't want to say,
the things that were
unspoken in the room.
And so I would say these things,
and it was very uncomfortable
for people.
And so I knew that I couldn't
be held and made safe
having this kind of seeing and
having this kind of knowing.
I had to make a choice
that the rest of me
needed to survive to
adulthood, and this
was the thing that was going
to have to be sacrificed.
>> CHRISTINE PAGE: And I think
it's important to recognize
that we are living in a world
of duality and that there is
a masculine and feminine just
as is a day and night and a left
and right.
Doesn't make one
better than another.
>> ALEX WARDEN: What I would say
is that feminine consciousness
is more relational,
is non-hierarchical.
It's embracing.
It focus on the things
that-- things and events
have in common.
The masculine approach is
much more classification.
It's much more focused
on the differences.
>>JERRY WENNSTROM: I think
men need to define reality--
no, it needs to be a thing.
It's almost like masculine
and feminine bodies.
Masculine body's a thing.
Women's body is a space.
>>ANAT VAUGHAN-LEE:
A devotion quality
is you can say this
was a feminine quality
because a devotional,
somebody who gave themselves.
It means that they don't
put themself first.
So you can't hide it.
You can feel it.
You're in touch with something.
You're in touch with your heart.
You feel.
You feel the other, empathy.
It's a feminine quality.
>> I feel like I'm just your
average American girl born
in the middle class,
went to public schools.
What was valued in my family
was intellectual intelligence,
linear thought, verbal
communication skills.
If you lost an argument,
you were not valued.
You were the loser
of the argument.
I was also a
competitive athlete.
So I had all these competitive
I win, you lose perspectives.
So all of these ways of being
negated another part of myself.
And I didn't see it
reflected in the world.
I didn't see people going,
oh, I love how intuitive
you are or creative you are or I
love how you connect to people.
It just wasn't seen
as something of value.
And then when I got to
the corporate world,
these feminine skills
that I had were being used
to make somebody else money.
>> Everybody's embracing the
internet but not with the kind
of fervor, not with
the kind of experience,
and not with the kind of
resources that IBM brings
to the table.
>> I didn't value the feminine.
I didn't even know it.
I didn't even know
the part to myself
that made it possible for me to
actually function in the world
because they were hidden.
>>LLEWELLYN
VAUGHAN-LEE: As far as I
can see the feminine has to
do with the whole mystery
of creation, the feminine
is the mother out
of which everything is born.
So the feminine is the
matrix of creation.
It is this divine
substance that gives birth
to everything in existence.
>>VANDANA SHIVA: The
feminine is in everyone.
The feminine is not about sex.
It's about a principle.
>> CHRISTINE PAGE: It's so much
easier to discuss the masculine
side, which I think many
of us carry, women and men.
And it has been heightened
over the last 3,000
years, the patriarchal
society, the masculine society,
and the masculine
elements of doing,
going out, being more
assertive, more aggressive,
being more competitive.
Feminine qualities, however,
are the ability to receive.
>>HILARY HART: They're
qualities of the feminine that
are very interrelated
with women's bodies.
So, for example, when
women are having a baby,
the line between woman
and baby is very fluid.
So women have this
natural capacity
to merge that affects the
rest of their lives, to merge,
to relate, to receive
information from,
and to offer what's needed.
And that comes from
the body that we have,
which is able to
gestate a child.
>>ORLAND BISHOP:
Everything that receives
is a quality of the feminine.
For instance, hospitality is
a feminine art in our society,
not to degree that that
it's exclusively for women
but the art of
hospitality is to be
able to prepare a
space for the guests.
>> We're going to be talking a
little bit about trying to find
your life's goal.
Are there some things that
people can do initially
to slow down and start
listening to their inner self?
>> I was successful in the
corporate world until my life
fell apart.
But that's what happened was
that something wasn't being
fed, and my life fell apart.
I was at a startup.
I was working 10 hours a day.
I didn't have a day
offer several months.
It was just an adrenaline,
hard-pushing, hard-focused
environment where if you
take a lunch, you're a wimp.
Seriously.
You take a lunch, you're a wimp.
I just pushed and
pushed and pushed.
And then at a certain
point in my life,
well, the universe said stop.
My partner committed suicide.
And then two members
of my family died.
And that was within three weeks.
I crashed physically,
and I had what
I would call a reckoning,
something where
I had to look hard at
the way I was living
and what my real values were.
There was no way to continue
down the path I was on.
It was just done.
That's done.
That is the end of
that part of your life.
And I was terrified
because I'd only known
hard work and focus and drive.
>>JERRY WENNSTROM: I think
of the feminine and masculine
like stars and the
black holes in space.
And in a way the black
hole being very feminine,
it's like it can create a
star or it can consume a star.
It looks like nothing, but it's
a very powerful, hovering force
in nature whereas the masculine,
you might say, is a star.
It's what you see.
It's the external thing.
It gets the light
and the glitter,
but it doesn't have that inner
power that the feminine has.
>>HILARY HART: The feminine is
the aspect of every human being
that wants to receive love.
So the feminine of longing.
The feminine says
I'm longing for love.
I want to know more of you, god.
I want to know what's real.
And that longing
pushes a human soul--
male or female-- pushes a
human soul closer and closer
to what's real.
>>STACEY LAWSON: I think
every man and every woman
has access to that
sacred feminine power.
It's not gender based.
If you move beyond even the
littlest bit beyond this sense
of separate self where men and
women are different and simply
look at the interior
landscape of any individual,
there is both masculine
and feminine at play.
>>MAATA LYNN BARRON:
For myself, I
would say that my male
was far more developed.
And then at some point,
the female element
started to move
more inside of me.
>> So how would you describe
feminine consciousness?
>>STACEY LAWSON: I
spent a lot of time
in masculine settings
and masculine roles
early in my life.
I grew up in a
very small logging
and mill town that
was very blue collar
and certainly
masculine dominated.
My education was in the
traditional corporate business
realm.
I went to Harvard
Business School,
which has a whole bunch
of models and ways
of thinking about the world that
tend to be highly masculinized.
And from there I started my
first company when I was 25,
sold that, and worked
in public companies
in the corporate boardroom
and the executive office
that all seemed to be
driven by the sense of power
and domination that the
prevailing model was how
do we conquer the marketplace,
overpower our competition,
act in a way that will
assure victory in a very
domination-oriented way.
And, in fact, I was
pretty good at that.
>> I went to interview Stacey
because I know she was very
successful in the business
world, she was an entrepreneur.
She built companies.
She sold companies.
She did huge deals.
And I know she also had
this experience of something
was missing in her life.
>>STACEY LAWSON: There
was some natural tendency
or some natural integration
that wasn't happening.
I was living in compartments.
During this whole
period, I actually
was also starting to
practice meditation,
and I would have these
deep intense experiences
on the meditation cushion.
But that was my private life.
And then I would have
done my business suit,
pull my hair back in a
bun, put on my glasses,
look as masculine as possible,
and go to close a $10 million
deal.
>> I arrived at this question
what is the feminine because I
didn't know.
I didn't know.
I knew what the masculine was
because our culture's permeated
with that, but I actually didn't
know what the feminine was.
And I'm not even
sure I still do,
but I knew that
that question was
something I needed to ask
because I didn't understand.
I decided to go to India.
India to me represented
the feminine.
You walk into an
intersection in India,
and everyone's in
the intersection.
There's camels.
There's dogs.
There's ox carts.
There's motorcycles.
There's trucks.
There's people.
There's-- and everybody is
in the intersection moving
together like one
mass of humanity.
And everyone's connected to
everyone, and it's a movement.
But if you have an agenda
and a plan that's linear
like then I'm going here
then I'm going here,
India will mess you up.
So for me, that culture
expresses the feminine
in its dark aspects
and its light aspects
and the aspects that serve
us and in the aspects
that we're terrified of.
You would see groups
of children destitute.
The poverty, it's
so heartbreaking.
I just didn't know
how to be with it.
They would surround me.
It was unbearable to be honest
with you, and I would run.
I ran from these
kids for five months,
but I realized that if I'm going
to accept the wholeness of who
I am and that is the feminine
doesn't reject anything,
that I was actually
going to have
to accept those things that
I saw as part of myself.
And so I stayed, and I
looked in their eyes.
>> In Europe, there's still a
connection in the unconscious
to the feminine, in the history
of the place of ancient culture
that is still there.
When I came to America,
it was just another story.
>> It's not here.
>> It was not here.
It was not present.
You could not feel it
within the culture.
In the Western culture
and in America,
especially, I think women
had to compromise themselves.
And in order to
validate who they are,
they had to adapt to the very
masculine mode in society
and also a very strong
expectation what is a woman
should be.
In this culture, unfortunately,
you have a Barbie doll,
and you have those measurements
that you should fit into.
And your bum should certainly
fit in this perfect jeans,
and then you are just right.
And you can walk into
street with confidence
because you know your
behind look great.
But really is this
what a woman is about?
>>LLEWELLYN VAUGHAN-LEE: I
think part of the tragedy,
if you like, is that a lot
of women have been conned.
They've been sold
something that is not true
either to them or to the
sacred feminine within them.
For example, in
North America, women
are supposedly
liberated and more
free than in other
parts of the world.
And yet the freedom that
they have been given
is a masculine freedom.
The ideals they have been
given, the patterns of behavior,
the values they have
been given are masculine.
So, in fact, they have
just been re-imprisoned.
They are promised independence
but masculine independence
rather than the
real interdependence
that belongs to the feminine.
And so in a way they have
been re-enslaved without even
being aware that they
have been re-enslaved.
>>ELINOR GADON:
For us in the West,
it means letting go of
so many things including
the feminist agenda, which
is again about power,
but it's not always about the
right kind of use of power.
Our understanding of power is
the corporate understanding
of power, power over.
When you have power within,
you can used that power
in a way that not only
is beneficial for you
but for others because you have
tapped into the life force.
And that is something which is--
transmits itself.
It's there like waves of
energy that come out of you.
Sadly in our way
in which women have
tried to reclaim for themselves
their own place in our culture
and society, they have
most often done so
by just becoming more like men.
>>VANDANA SHIVA:
After all in India,
the word Shakti means the
energy of the universe,
the energy of the
universe in creative form
and in feminine form.
>> ALEX WARDEN: There was a time
in which consciousness was more
feminine.
There was an
appreciation of life,
of the whole of life
as being the mother,
as being the goddess,
the great goddess.
>> CHRISTINE PAGE: There
was such a deep connection
to the universe
within the Earth.
You would have-- they
may call them gods
but it would be god of the
chair and god of the train.
So your god was in everything.
And that means we're
never separated.
>>LLEWELLYN VAUGHAN-LEE:
Well, of course,
if you think of the
myth of Persephone
and the whole descent
into the underworld
is this mystery of
feminine transformation
of the maiden gathering flowers,
suddenly the ground opens,
and she falls into the
underworld and the whole myth
that comes out of it
of descent and rebirth
that has to do with the cycle
of creation, the seasons.
>> CHRISTINE PAGE: And
in around about 1500 BC,
the development of a sky god,
a god who was up there and you
could never reach him.
[SINGING]
>> ALEX WARDEN: At that point is
like we leave historically what
it would be the way
of the feminine,
and you enter into the
development of the mind
and the development of what is
different into the development
of what is unique.
And once writing systems
develop, the mind develop,
mathematics, god was not
on the earth anymore.
It was in the sky.
At that point if you are looking
up, looking for whatever god
that you think is
there and you--
and here is not any more,
there is nothing to value here.
>>HILARY HART: In many
of the great strides
that we've made in
the last 2,000 years
are incredible gifts from
the divine masculine aspects
from masculine intelligence.
But there has been
such an imbalance
and we've seen that more lately
in the last 50 to 75 years,
and that imbalance
is revealing itself
through, incredible
poverty through
great ecological destruction.
[EXPLOSION]
>>LLEWELLYN
VAUGHAN-LEE: Well, you
could say yes we are the final
hubris of a patriarchal culture
that has separated itself
from the natural world, that
has separated itself from
the cycles of creation, that
has long ago lost any
understanding of the sacredness
of the feminine, the
sacredness of the Earth.
>> When I got back from
India, I was completely unable
to function here.
Something inside me had shifted.
I didn't know how
to talk to people.
I didn't even know how
to be in the world.
Even going to the grocery
store was difficult.
And the only thing
that made sense to me
was to go out in nature
and lie on the ground.
I would go to this one
park over and over,
and I would lie under
the same tree for hours.
I didn't understand why.
It didn't make sense,
but it's the only thing
I could think to do.
I started with a question,
something I didn't understand.
>>HILARY HART: Well,
if we look around life,
we know that we've reached
the end of something.
If we don't understand
creative power,
we cannot create solutions
to the issues facing us.
And creative power
is traditionally
the domain of the feminine.
>>STACEY LAWSON: What organism
would actually go create war,
conflict, hoard
resources, over consume
without ultimately creating and
bringing about its own demise?
There's no other species on the
planet that behaves in the way
like man does.
There's almost a necessary
evolutionary impulse,
but there's no way out
except through some elevation
of our human consciousness.
And so what does that mean?
It means I think the domination
paradigm can't really go on.
And so if you're not
going to do domination,
what are you going to do?
>> Collaboration?
>>STACEY LAWSON: Yeah,
maybe collaboration.
>>ORLAND BISHOP: Well,
maybe for the last 100 years
or so I think collectively
we've been doing more reflection
than any other time in our
human civilization to the degree
that what is showing up
as crisis in our world,
as forcing us to reflect on our
own behavior, our attitudes,
our relationships, and
what we call our future.
We do not have time
to continue to be
unconscious about these factors.
And as such, we are in touch
again with the feminine
because we have
to reflect on what
we are meeting in our world.
>> CHRISTINE PAGE: I'm
going to say without it,
we as a civilization
can't continue.
The feminine within everybody
is the receiver and the creator,
the give-- we give birth
to new consciousness.
It is a feminine energy
to have the inspiration
and bring it through
into manifestation.
>>LLEWELLYN VAUGHAN-LEE:
If something
is going to be reborn
within the individual,
then we have to reclaim the
sacred feminine if in a way
we are going to carry
the seeds of the future.
And interestingly myth
illogically the seeds
belong to the feminine.
The whole mystery
of the seed that
is put in the air that is
put in the darkness that
waits for the right season,
waits for the rains to come,
waits for the sun to come
is also a feminine mystery.
So if we are going
to hold within us
the seeds of the future
whenever that future is,
that needs an understanding
and appreciation and awareness
of the sacred feminine.
>>JERRY WENNSTROM: To
God, we're all feminine
because we're all
receiving from that divine.
None of-- I think
the great folly
is what we're experiencing
in America where we're
trying to control with
bigger bombs and more
blatant destructive
power, and we're just
trying to keep that
dead horse alive
when it's the opposite
that has to happen.
It's not knowing.
It's surrender.
It's tears.
It's forgiveness.
It's befriending the universe
instead of destroying it.
>> I don't even remember
how I found out about Jerry,
but he has a fascinating story.
He was willing to
risk everything.
>>JERRY WENNSTROM: I
was extremely driven
as a young painter.
I'd produced an
enormous body of work.
I was beginning to
be acknowledged.
I feel like I took that
as far as it could go.
I couldn't have done
more with the masculine.
I believed it would
have killed me.
I think it would have.
I was intuiting and
beginning to sense something
larger that required a
kind of quantum leap.
I fasted for a month,
and after the fast,
it became really clear.
I just got this hit that I
could jump in and let it all
go and trust that
emptiness to carry my life.
And that emptiness
embodies everything that
was my own missing feminine.
So on the strength
of that clarity,
I destroyed all my work.
I gave everything I owned away.
I never asked
anyone for anything,
and I lived that
way for 15 years.
I knew the nature of
solid ground as a man,
as a willful, driven male.
I jumped off into a
whole other medium
that I knew nothing
about, and I think
what I had to learn was
not necessarily to swim.
I needed to learn
the buoyancy of water
itself, which is the
feminine ability of nature
of the universe to
carry our lives.
>>ANAT VAUGHAN-LEE: What does it
mean to have a feminine power?
It is the yes, the yes to life.
The creation only has a yes.
How can be a no?
You can see a beautiful
woman sometimes,
but she's so much in her head.
And you can tell
it, but you can also
feel if you sit with
her that maybe--
not every woman--
but maybe this woman
there is another longing in her
to leave something else in her.
Or this part of her is
there, but it's blocked.
>> I've spent a lot of time
avoiding learning to listen
inside because I always thought
that then I'd be a servant
to my inner voice, and
I wanted what I wanted.
So I feel like a bit of a newbie
around listening to myself.
It's a struggle
every day, and I have
to actually remember--
try to remember
to ask myself the question.
What feels right?
How can I orient myself
around what feels right to me?
I feel like I'm right
at the place where I can
remember to ask the question.
I'm just barely there though.
I'm barely at a place where
I can say how does this feel.
>>ORLAND BISHOP: There's
a power in stillness.
I am available to myself.
This is stillness.
When I'm preparing to be
available to the world,
it's stillness.
And this is the feminine
in its highest expression.
I'm preparing myself
to be available
to myself and to the world.
>>LLEWELLYN VAUGHAN-LEE: We
don't know what will be reborn.
We don't know what
will be asked of us.
So to be prepared to
live in this state
of acute vulnerability
really allows the divine
to recreate itself.
>> CHRISTINE PAGE: It's a
heart that says to something
that's never been done before.
Take a risk.
And the heart is
the part of me that
will say nobody's doing
it out there but trust.
I think that's word--
the word courage comes
from that is coeur, the heart,
a French word for the heart.
We don't get
courage in our head.
We get courage in our heart.
>>MAATA LYNN BARRON: Know
that you already know.
You know the answers to all
the questions that were asked.
You already know
just getting yourself
into an aware enough
state that you can
listen to how you would answer.
That you'll have to open up
space for that to happen.
Most people do.
Their lives are usually
pretty full and full of noise.
So it's how do you turn the
noise off in order to listen,
and how do you do
that every day,
not just every once in a while?
>> There's some relief that
comes with learning how
to integrate this part of
myself because the battering
of the mind is gone, this
you're not good enough,
you don't know what you're
doing questioning, questioning,
questioning.
That's on the back burner.
And so there's spaciousness.
There's forgiveness for myself,
forgiveness for other beings.
And I have to say there's
more love in my life.
>>LLEWELLYN VAUGHAN-LEE: What
does this film mean to you?
Because it seems that this
film is part of your journey.
And so what is
this story for you?
What is this journey for you?
What is this uncovering for you?
>> The deepest call of my
heart, the deepest longing is
to serve.
Not that I don't
want stuff I do but--
That where I am now.
>>LLEWELLYN VAUGHAN-LEE:
What are these deep cycles
of creation that
we're involved in?
If we can look for a moment
beyond cause and effect,
beyond seeing a
problem and trying
to find a solution to something
deeper, to something more
eternal, then maybe then can--
a mystery can be born again.